SampleTextFile_1200kb.txt$15074$15Abraham Lincoln was the 16th president of the United States. He preserved the Union during the U.S. Civil War and brought about the emancipation of slaves.
Who Was Abraham Lincoln?

Abraham Lincoln“ (February 12, 1809 to April 14, 1865) was the 16th president of the United States and is regarded as one of America's greatest heroes due to his role as savior of the Union and emancipator of the sla“ves. His rise from humble beginnings to achieving the highest office in the land is a remarkable story. He was suddenly and tragically assassinated at a time when his country needed him to complete th“e great task remaining before the nation. His eloquence of democracy and insistence that the Union was worth saving embody the ideals of self-government that all nations strive to achieve. Lincoln's d“istinctively human and humane personality and incredible impact on the nation has endowed him with an enduring legacy.
lincoln-first-raw
15
Gallery
15 Images
When and Where Was Lincoln Born?

A“braham Lincoln was born in a log cabin in Hardin County, Kentucky, on February 12, 1809.
Lincoln‚Äôs Emancipation Proclamation

On January 1, 1863, Lincoln delivered the Emancipation Proclamation, “reshaping the cause of the Civil War from saving the Union to abolishing slavery. The Union Army's first year and a half of battlefield defeats made it difficult to keep up morale and support strong f“or a reunification of the nation. And the Union victory at Antietam on September 22, 1862, while by no means conclusive, was hopeful, giving Lincoln confidence to officially change the goals of the wa“r.

Lincoln‚Äôs Emancipation Proclamation stated that all individuals who were held as slaves in rebellious states "henceforward shall be free." The action was more symbolic than effective because t“he North didn‚Äôt control any states in rebellion and the proclamation didn‚Äôt apply to Border States, Tennessee or some Louisiana parishes.
Lincoln‚Äôs Most Famous Speech: The Gettysburg Address
“
On November 19, 1863, Lincoln delivered what would become his most famous speech and one of the most important speeches in American history, the Gettysburg Address. Addressing a crowd of around 15,00“0 people, Lincoln delivered his 272-word speech at one of the bloodiest battlefields of the Civil War, the National Cemetery of Gettysburg, in Pennsylvania.

The Civil War, Lincoln said, was the ult“imate test of the preservation of the Union created in 1776, and the dead at Gettysburg fought to uphold this cause. Lincoln evoked the Declaration of Independence, saying it was up to the living to e“nsure that the ‚Äúgovernment of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth,‚Äù and this Union was ‚Äúdedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.‚Äù A c“ommon interpretation was that the President was expanding the cause of the Civil War from simply reunifying the Union to also fighting for equality and abolishing slavery.
Abraham Lincoln‚Äôs Assassi“nation

Abraham Lincoln was shot on April 14, 1865, by well-known actor and Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth at Ford's Theatre in Washington, D.C. He was taken to the Petersen House across “the street and laid in a coma for nine hours before dying the next morning. His body lay in state at the Capitol before a funeral train took him back to his final resting place in Springfield, Illinoi“s.
Family

Abraham Lincoln was born to Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks Lincoln. Thomas was a strong and determined pioneer who found a moderate level of prosperity and was well respected in the comm“unity. The couple had two other children: Abraham's older sister Sarah and younger brother Thomas, who died in infancy.

When young Abraham was nine years old, his mother died of tremetol (milk sick“ness) at age 34, on October 5, 1818. The event was devastating to him, and young Abraham grew more alienated from his father and quietly resented the hard work placed on him at an early age. In Decemb“erassi“nation

Abraham Lincoln was shot on April 14, 1865, by well-known actor and Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth at Ford's Theatre in Washington, D.C. He was taken to the Petersen House across “the street and laid in a coma for nine hours before dying the next morning. His body lay in state at the Capitol before a funeral train took him back to his final resting place in Springfield, Illinoi“s.
Family

Abraham Lincoln was born to Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks Lincoln. Thomas was a strong and determined pioneer who found a moderate level of prosperity and was well respected in the comm“unity. The couple had two other children: Abraham's older sister Sarah and younger brother Thomas, who died in infancy.

When young Abraham was nine years old, his mother died of tremetol (milk sick“ness) at age 34, on October 5, 1818. The event was devastating to him, and young Abraham grew more alienated from his father and quietly resented the hard work placed on him at an early age. In Decemb“er 1819, just over a year after his mother‚Äôs death, Lincoln‚Äôs father Thomas married Sarah Bush Johnston, a Kentucky widow with three children of her own. She was a strong and affectionate woman wi“th whom Abraham quickly bonded.
Childhood and Education

The Lincolns were forced to move from Abraham‚Äôs birthplace of Kentucky to Perry County, Indiana, due to a land dispute in 1817. There the “family "squatted" on public land to scrap out a living in a crude shelter, hunting game and farming a small plot. Abraham‚Äôs father was eventually able to buy the land.

Though both his parents wer“e most likely illiterate, Thomas‚Äô new wife Sarah encouraged Abraham to read. It was while growing into manhood that Abraham Lincoln received his formal education ‚Äî an estimated total of 18 months “‚Äî a few days or weeks at a time. Reading material was in short supply in the Indiana wilderness. Neighbors recalled how Abraham would walk for miles to borrow a book. He undoubtedly read the family “Bible and probably other popular books at that time such as Robinson Crusoe, Pilgrims Progress and Aesop‚Äôs Fables.

In March, 1830, the family again migrated, this time to Macon County, Illinois. “When his father moved the family again to Coles County, 22-year-old Abraham Lincoln struck out on his own, making a living in manual labor. At six feet four inches tall, Lincoln was rawboned and lanky“, but muscular and physically strong. He spoke with a backwoods twang and walked with a long-striding gait. He was known for his skill in wielding an ax and early on made a living splitting wood for f“ire and rail fencing.

Young Abraham Lincoln eventually migrated to the small community of New Salem, Illinois, where over a period of years he worked as a shopkeeper, postmaster and eventually gene“ral store owner. It was there that Lincoln, working with the public, acquired social skills and honed storytelling talent that made him popular with the locals. When the Black Hawk War broke out in 18“32 between the Uniteassi“nation

Abraham Lincoln was shot on April 14, 1865, by well-known actor and Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth at Ford's Theatre in Washington, D.C. He was taken to the Petersen House across “the street and laid in a coma for nine hours before dying the next morning. His body lay in state at the Capitol before a funeral train took him back to his final resting place in Springfield, Illinoi“s.
Family

Abraham Lincoln was born to Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks Lincoln. Thomas was a strong and determined pioneer who found a moderate level of prosperity and was well respected in the comm“unity. The couple had two other children: Abraham's older sister Sarah and younger brother Thomas, who died in infancy.

When young Abraham was nine years old, his mother died of tremetol (milk sick“ness) at age 34, on October 5, 1818. The event was devastating to him, and young Abraham grew more alienated from his father and quietly resented the hard work placed on him at an early age. In Decemb“er